# .NET Glossary
Reference : https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/standard/glossary
<br>
<br>

# runtime

In general, `the execution environment for a managed program`. The OS is part of the runtime environment but is not part of the .NET runtime. Here are some examples of .NET runtimes in this sense of the word:

- Common Language Runtime ([CLR](#clr))
- .NET Native (for UWP)
- Mono runtime

The word "runtime" has a different meaning in some contexts:

* *.NET runtime* on the [.NET 5 download page](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download/dotnet/5.0).

  You can download the *.NET runtime* or other runtimes, such as the *ASP.NET Core runtime*. A *runtime* in this usage is the set of components that must be installed on a machine to run a [framework-dependent](../core/deploying/index.md#publish-framework-dependent) app on the machine. The .NET runtime includes the [CLR](#clr) and the .NET [shared framework](#shared-framework), which provides the [BCL](#bcl).

* *.NET runtime libraries*

  Refers to the same libraries that [BCL](#bcl) refers to. However, other runtimes, such as the ASP.NET Core runtime, have different [shared frameworks](#shared-framework), with additional libraries that build on the BCL.

* [Runtime Identifier (RID)](../core/rid-catalog.md).

  *Runtime* here means the OS platform and CPU architecture that a .NET app runs on, for example: `linux-x64`.

* Sometimes "runtime" is used in the sense of an [implementation of .NET](#implementation-of-net), as in the following examples:

  - "The various .NET runtimes implement specific versions of .NET Standard. … Each .NET runtime version advertises the highest .NET Standard version it supports …"
  - "Libraries that are intended to run on multiple runtimes should target this framework." (referring to .NET Standard)
  <br>
  <br>
  <br>

# implementation of .NET

An implementation of .NET includes:

- One or more runtimes. Examples: [CLR](#clr), [CoreRT](#corert).
- A class library that implements a version of .NET Standard and may include additional APIs. Examples: the [BCLs](#bcl) for [.NET Framework](#net-framework) and [.NET 5 (and .NET Core) and later versions](#net-5-and-later-versions).
- Optionally, one or more application frameworks. Examples: [ASP.NET](#aspnet), Windows Forms, and WPF are included in .NET Framework and .NET 5+.
- Optionally, development tools. Some development tools are shared among multiple implementations.

Examples of .NET implementations:

- [.NET Framework](#net-framework)
- [.NET 5 (and .NET Core) and later versions](#net-5-and-later-versions)
- [Universal Windows Platform (UWP)](#uwp)
- [Mono](#mono)

For more information, see [.NET implementations](../fundamentals/implementations.md).

## library

A collection of APIs that can be called by apps or other libraries. A .NET library is composed of one or more [assemblies](#assembly).

The words library and [framework](#framework) are often used synonymously.
<br>
<br>
<br>

# .NET Standard

A formal specification of .NET APIs that are available in each [.NET implementation](#implementation-of-net).

The .NET Standard specification is sometimes called a library. Because a library includes API implementations, not only specifications (interfaces), it's misleading to call .NET Standard a "library."

See [.NET Standard](net-standard.md).